Lesson Objectives
Identify characteristics of living organisms.
Describe cells.
Explain why living things need energy.
Give an example of a stimulus and response.
Compare sexual and asexual reproduction.
Define homeostasis.
Lesson Vocabulary
cell
energy
homeostasis
reproduction
response
stimulus (stimuli, plural)
Introduction
Look at the photos in Figure below. How are they similar? All of them show living organisms. Observe how different the organisms are from each other. Clearly, living things are very diverse. Yet all of the organisms in the pictures share the same basic characteristics of life. Can you guess what these characteristics are?
Defining Life
Five characteristics are used to define life. All living things share these characteristics. All living things:
are made of one or more cells.
need energy to stay alive.
respond to stimuli in their environment.
grow and reproduce.
maintain a stable internal environment.
Living Things Are Made of Cells
Cells are the basic building blocks of life. They are like tiny factories where virtually all life processes take place. Some living things, like the bacteria in Figure above, consist of just one cell. They are called single-celled organisms. You can see other single-celled organisms in Figure 2.2. Some living things are composed of a few to many trillions of cells. They are called multicellular organisms. Your body is composed of trillions of cells.
Regardless of the type of organism, all living cells share certain basic structures. For example, all cells are enclosed by a membrane. The cell membrane separates the cell from its environment. It also controls what enters or leaves the cell.
Living Things Need Energy
Everything you do takes energy. Energy is the ability to change or move matter. Whether it’s reading these words or running a sprint, it requires energy. In fact, it takes energy just to stay alive. Where do you get energy? You probably know the answer. You get energy from food. 
Just like you, other living things need a source of energy. But they may use a different source. Organisms may be grouped on the basis of the source of energy they use. In which group do you belong?
Producers such as the tree in Figure above use sunlight for energy to produce their own “food.” The process is called photosynthesis, and the “food” is sugar. Plants and other organisms use this food for energy.
Consumers such as the raccoon in Figure above eat plants—or other consumers that eat plants—as a source of energy.
Some consumers such as the mushroom in Figure above get their energy from dead organic matter. For example, they might consume dead leaves on a forest floor.
Living Things Respond to their Environment
When a living thing responds to its environment, it is responding to a stimulus. Astimulus (stimuli, plural) is something in the environment that causes a reaction in an organism. The reaction a stimulus produces is called a response.
Imagine how you would respond to the following stimuli:
You’re about to cross a street when the walk light turns red.
You hear a smoke alarm go off in the kitchen.
You step on an upturned tack with a bare foot.
You smell the aroma of your favorite food.
You taste something really sour.
It doesn’t take much imagination to realize that responding appropriately to such stimuli might help keep you safe. It might even help you survive.
Like you, all other living things sense and respond to stimuli in their environment. In general, their responses help them survive or reproduce. Watch this amazing time-lapse video to see how a plant responds to the stimuli of light and gravity as it grows. Why do you think it is important for a plant to respond appropriately to these stimuli for proper growth?
Living Things Grow and Reproduce
Like plants, all living things have the capacity for growth. The ducklings in Figure below have a lot of growing to do to catch up in size to their mother. Multicellular organisms like ducks grow by increasing the size and number of their cells. Single-celled organisms just grow in size.
As the ducklings grow, they will develop and mature into adults. By adulthood, they will be able to reproduce. Reproduction is the production of offspring. The ability to reproduce is another characteristic of living things.
Many organisms reproduce sexually. In sexual reproduction, parents of different sexes mate to produce offspring. The offspring have some combination of the traits of the two parents. Ducks are examples of sexually reproducing organisms. Other organisms reproduce asexually. In asexual reproduction, a single parent can produce offspring alone. For example, a bacterial cell reproduces by dividing into two daughter cells. The daughter cells are identical to each other and to the parent cell.
Living Things Maintain a Stable Internal Environment
The tennis player in Figure below has really worked up a sweat. Do you know why we sweat? Sweating helps to keep us cool. When sweat evaporates from the skin, it uses up some of the body’s heat energy. Sweating is one of the ways that the body maintains a stable internal environment. It helps keep the body’s internal temperature constant. When the body’s internal environment is stable, the condition is called homeostasis.
All living organisms have ways of maintaining homeostasis. They have mechanisms for controlling such factors as their internal temperature, water balance, and acidity. Homeostasis is necessary for normal life processes that take place inside cells. If an organism can’t maintain homeostasis, normal life processes are disrupted. Disease or even death may result.
Lesson Summary
All living things are made of cells, use energy, respond to stimuli, grow and reproduce, and maintain homeostasis.
All living things consist of one or more cells. Cells are the basic units of structure and function of living organisms.
Energy is the ability to change or move matter. All life processes require energy, so all living things need energy.
All living things can sense and respond to stimuli in their environment. Stimuli might include temperature, light, or gravity.
All living things grow and reproduce. Multicellular organisms grow by increasing in cell size and number. Single-celled organisms increase in cell size. All organisms can normally reproduce, or produce offspring. Reproduction can be sexual or asexual.
All living things have ways of maintaining a stable internal environment. This stable condition is called homeostasis.
Lesson Review Questions
Recall
List five characteristics of living things.
Describe cells.
What is energy? How do organisms use energy?
Apply Concepts
Describe a response to an environmental stimulus that might save your life.
Think Critically
Discuss the role of reproduction in life.
Explain why having a fever when you are sick disrupts your body’s homeostasis.
Points to Consider
In this lesson, you read that all living things consist of one or more cells.
What are cells made of?
Is there any matter that is smaller than a cell?