The Unwanted Chemical structure
la
(artofstyle)
By: Joe David Ramirez- 
Purpose: How to remove a unwanted chemical such as coffee from a white cotton t -shirt.
Also this was to show what I have learned as a young chemist.
Online Research:
Laundry detergents have multiple chemicals in it to do it's job. They include some things
such as fluorescent brighteners to make the shirts or other clothing brighter. A lot of them
have enzymes to allow the decomposition of the unwanted chemical to occur a fast rate.
Since a lot of the things that causes the clothing to stain are usually things that we eat or
drink, it will contain the things to break down the food stains or drink stains. Some examples
are proteases, lipases, and amylases. The proteases help break down proteins, as for
lipases help break down the fats, as for the amylases it breaks down the carbohydrates.
The detergents also include some fragrances to give it, its unique smell (HowStuffWorks)
0
CH3
N"
C H3
(Coffee stain.)
012011 1! PIt
10-°\
o -1 o 7 R
\
, I
—o 0
It OH CH2 OH
(Cotton Structural formula)
H H it
H—C—C- 0—H
0 0 0
I I.
H H H
(Glycerol)
Expert Research:
I have tried to get in contact with Gain and Dial products. I chose these two because they
have laundry detergents that do a marvelous job to remove any stains from the clothings at
my household. I was hoping they would provide information about the laundry detergents.
They just got back to me, with simple replies, saying how they happy to answer any
questions.
I also contacted a friend from college, I thought he was a good expert since he took chem at
a college level and he works where his shirts always gets dirty. I always see his shirts pretty
dang clean. His name is Chris Nunez who helped me define a stain, provided good amount
of information on how to break a chemical band.
Experiment: Place the clothing with the stain in a bowl or a cup and stir the solution
several minutes then repeat until stain is gone.
Materials: Glycerol, Cotton material with stain (Coffee stain), Water, bowl or cup at
something to stir the solution.
Observation: The stain of the coffee has removed after a few minutes of stirrino the
solution of water and glycerol. The cotton material did turn white but not as bright.
Discussion:
The liquid detergents that are used to clean the clothing in your machine washer contains
many chemicals that are used as solvents. The solvents act as a space provider for the
solute in this case it would be the stain (ion to ion attractions). The stain then dissolves into
the solvents spaces, then it creates a big homogenous mixture since they are together and
not in bands or layers. The stain is able to dissolve into the solvent in the washer machine
because of the liquid detergent that is put in, which contains the decomposing chemicals
such as proteases, lipases, and amylases(HowStriffW orks). They break down the chemicals
into molecules that fit into the spaces. In my experiment i haven't used a liquid detergent but
father arrarconol. The alcohol was able to do it's job since the three carbon atoms shared
it's electrons with each other, making them covalent bonds. As for the OH's which is what
makes this chemical an alcohol(reference table R), the oxygen gives its electrons to the
carbon and the hydrogen atoms. For the carbon atom that means it would have taken its
fourth electron which means it has been reduced since it completed the 1st oxidation state
of gaining 4. As for the oxygen it gains electrons from the hydrogen atom but it shares the
electrons with the carbon atom, the o onen atom holds more of the electron since its
electro negativity is great than the carbon. This makes the oxygen slightly more negative
than the carbon, thus creating a polar covalent bond between the two, as for the IMF being
moderate high. As for the hydrogen and the oxygen the electron is com'
ttj
a ferredto
the hydrogen, making the bond between them completely polar since the hydrogen is
oxidized and becomes positive 1 while the oxygen becomes reduced and becomes
negative 2(PTE). As a molecule as a whole its non polar since the symmetry is about the
same and the size el it is deoehli) making the whole thing have an IMF of moderate high
which makes the molecule—a liquid at STP (Glycerol.)As for the cotton material it is a solid
at STP due to the fact it is polar and as a molecule as a whole it is pretty big, as thing get
bigger it has a greater pull to other things and each other(Corton Structural formula). The
caffeine has an high moderate high IMF since it contains a lot of atoms and it is somewhat
symmetrical (Coffee stain.). Glycerol is able to pull away the caffeine stain by pulling it away
from it polar sides.
Environmental Research:
Compared to other solvents that liquid detergents that can contaminate the environment,
while glycerol doesn't at all so it can be dumped without a lot of worries. (Glycerol as a
Green Solvent)
Health Implications:
Even though alcohols aren't the best when taken a bit too much doses, where you can drink
it to get the buzz or get to the point where you can kill yourself. Glycerol is an alcohol that is
put in medicine to lose weight and to improve exercise performance. It helps from
dehydration after you have dropped a load in the big shiny white bowl. There are more pro's
than con's so glycerol isn't really harming to the person, it just depends on the person to
take the decision to use it for good or bad. (GLYCEROL: Uses, Side Effects, Interactions and
Warnings)
Conclusion:
As a chemist I w uld like to say glycerol. Glycerol is a cool chemical. It is green, it helps
th people with eight loss, or by simply cleaning their favorite clothing. It has done a good
job at taking out the stain. As a smart chemist I an [would like to say go get some glycerol
if you don't already have it!
Work cited
Title: Artofstyle. Digital image. N.p., ad Web.  l7tto://artofity1e.h1Icklebure.com/wv-
contentlualoads/2014/01/coffee-stain-removal-before-and-aftering .
Online Research:
1: "HowStulfWorks "Components of Lawwfry Detergent" HowSteWoiles. N.p., n. d. Web. 11
June 2014.  hito./0wine.howstuffivorlcs.conillanndry-detergenahtm .
2: Coffee stain. Digital image. N.p., n.d. Web.
 http://img2.wikia.nocookie.net/ cb20100716123233/droiren/de/images/a/aa/Koffein -
Caffeine.png .
3: Cotton Structural formula. Digital image. N.p., n.d. Web.
 litto://eottommissouri.ed&imanes/ChomicatCotton.aif .
4: Glycerol. Digital image. N.p., n.d. Web.  htip://nononsensestrenath.comfalycerol.Ma .
Expert Research:
Discussion;
1. ion to ion attraction lab
2. "FlowS14Works "Components of Laundry Detergent" HowStuftWorks. Np. ii. d. Web. 11
June 2014.  httu://home.howstuffworks.conillaundry-cletergent2. him .
3. Reference table R
4. PTE
5, Glycerol. Digital image. N.p., n.d. Web.  http://nononsensestrenath.corniglyceroljog .
6.Cotton Structural formula. Digital image. N.p., n.d. Web.
7. Coffee stain. Digital image. N.p., n.d. Web.
Environmental Research:
1. "Glycerol as a Green Solvent." 14., SI. cl Web.
 littp 34 2F 2Fgreenglycerol.wilcispaces.com 2FProperties 2Bol 2BGlycerol 2Bas 2
Ba 2BSolvent .
Health Implications:
1 ."GLYCEROL: Uses, Side Effects, Interactions and Warnings - WebMD."WebMD. WebMD,
n.d. Web. 12 June 2014.  http://www.webtnd.cotnivitamins-supplements/ingredientmono-4-
GLYCEROL.aspx?activeIngredientId &actiyeIngredientName=GLYCEROL .
Joe  
2/24/14
Mrs.Welch
Appendix
Ion to ion attractions versus the molecule to ion attraction
  Salt are ionic compounds that have metal and non metal.
  Electronegativity and size of the compound determines the IMF of the salt
  Some salts has a great IMF which means that the ion to ion attraction is greater than
the molecule to molecule attraction, enabling them to dissolve into the water.
  The water then becomes the solvent because it provides the space for the salts that
do dissolve into water.
  If the salt has a low IMF, meaning that the ion to ion attraction is greater than the
molecule to molecule attraction, then it will dissolve into the water making the salt
become the solute.
  The ions of the salt then stays between the spaces of the water molecules
  If all the spaces are occupied in the solution then the solution becomes saturated
  If more salts are added to the solution it would remain as a solid since there are no
other spaces that it could occupy in the solution, making the solution more into the
category of a supersaturated solution,
  If more water was to be added to the solution, when the water is the solvent of the
solution, it would create more spaces for more salt to be dissolved into.
  Temperature could also affect the amount of salt that could be put into a solution. As
the temperature rise the entropy of the water increases, stretching Imf, which
increases the space between the water molecules. Which would enable more salt to
be dissolved.
  if temperature decreases the space between the water molecules also decreases,
the solution would have less salt occupying the spaces.
May 30(13 days
ago)
Joe ramirez- 
loe .72eaper@gmail.com 
to Christoph.nunez
Chris Flu your a busy dude, but get back to me when you can.
Jun 11 (1 day ago)
Christopher Nunez
to me
Hey Joe.
It really depends on the stain.
Jun 11(1 day
ago)
Joe ramirez- 
 joe .72eaper@gmail.com 
to Christopher
Alright dude, so lets get basic here then. What is a stain?
Jun 11 (1 day ago)
Christopher Nunez
to me
To break it down for you, a stain is an unwanted chemical structure. The stain is mainly composed
of what we eat or drink. Unlike the stain, the clothing has the wanted chemicals.
9:09 PM (23 hours
ago)
Joe ramirez- 
loe .72eaper@gmail.com 
to Christopher
Alright, but how exactly do you break the bond between the unwanted chemical and the wanted
chemical?
6:45 PM (2 hours ago)
Christopher Nunez
to me
To break a bond you could either add energy so the bonds stretch and break IMF creating the
molecules to change its physical state from liquid to gas. You can also introduce another chemical
to break the bond
Dial - CS201405-019874
dialsonsumeraffairsOus.henketcom
HaY 28
to me
Dear Mr.  ,
Thank you for taking the time to contact us concerning a Dial product
We can answer question thru email. How can we assist you.
Thank you for contacting us.
Sincerely,
Henkel Consumer Affairs
Henkel Consumer Goods Inc.
7201 E Henkel Way MS 2.90
Scottsdale AZ 85255
Ph: 1.800258.3425
Web: www.henkelnacom
May 28
Joe ramirez-   joe .72eaper@gmail.com 
: to dial.consumera
Yeah I would like to know what is in your PureEx laundry detergent, what exactly makes it effective to
remove stains on clothing?
"P&G Gain"  gain@2ud7ybote2n07gjeulayh7egsos5sdcoxgns3nhyp6b0fo3dsg.7-
jviveawina5.apex.salesforee.com 
 gain@2ud7ybote2n07gjeuk9yh7egsos5sdcoxgns3nhyp6b0fo3dsg.7-
jviveaw.na5.apex.salesforce.com 
May
1i 28
to me
_
Thank you for contacting Gain, Joe.
I would be more than happy to answer any questions that you may have about our Gain detergent or
Gain fabric enhancers. Your e-mail didn't ask any questions in particular but please let us know how
we can help!
Thanks for writing.
Stephanie
Gain Team
May 28
Joe ramirez-   joe .72eaper@gmail.com 
to gain
Yeah I want to know what is in the laundry detergent that could remove stains like it does