Removing Coffee Stains From Silk
Removing Coffee Stains From Silk
Camryn  
May 8,2014
  1
Removing Coffee Stains From Silk

Objective:
To determine an effective and non -damaging way to remove,coffee stains from silk
material.
individual Online Research:
Silk is one of the most deliciate fabrics therefore making stain removal slightly more
difficult. Coffee is also a stubborn liquid meaning it sets into fabric very quickly if cleaning
measures aren't taken right away. Removing excess coffee that hasn't settled into the silk
should be the first step to ensure the stain does not become more severe. (wikihow.com)
Rough cleaning methods are not recommended for use on silk as it may distress
the material and alter the appearance. Alternating use of lukewarm water and glycerine to
be applied with a sponge and rubbed slightly between hands removes the possibility of aq
cloth being snagged or pulled and by eliminating the use of harsh chemicals, the cl
more likely to remain true to its original physical characteristics. (chemistry.co.nz)
Glycerin is another name for the compound glycerol which is comprised of the
elements hydrogen and oxygen, bonded together in a bent shape. The chemical is most
typically colorless as well as odorless and is soluble in water. Glycerin moisturizing
properties prevent skin and fabric from dying up and becoming hard. By slowing down the
drying process, it allows for more time to work effectively on stain removal before the stain
sets in. (en.wikipedia.org)
  2
Removing Coffee Stains From Silk
Coffee is considered to be a Tannin stain, meaning it is more likely to be removed
by detergents than soap. The soap has an effect on these kinds of stains that tends to
make them permanent or harder to remove. An old tannin stain may require the application
of bleach in order for it to be completely removed however this creates the risk of
destroying the fabric. (ohioline.osu.edu)
Common components in laundry detergents include cleaning enzymes which speed
up the rates of the reaction and cleaning polymers which weaken the bond between the
stain and the fabric and break the two apart by digesting proteins or fats within the stain /
itself. (prezi.com) Surfactant molecules are also a common and crucial piece to
detergents. (fide.com) By having both hydrophilic and hydrophobic parts, it has the ability
to break the surface tension of water while attracting to the stain itself. Therefore as the
fl surface tension breaks apart it loosens the bond between the stain molecules and the
fabric, eventually pulling the two apart. (chemistry.co.nz) If the stain does not begin to
remove itself immediately after treatment with laundry detergent, soaking in 5 minute
intervals is advised. This gives the surfactant molecules a greater surface area of water to
act on, thus increasing the strength of the breaking of the bonds between the stain and
fabric. (maids.com)
The actual breaking of this bond is due to the composition of the surfactant
molecule. With a hydrocarbon tail and small polar head, the molecule is able to surround
the stain with its tail and use its polar end to begin to dissolve into the solvent, in most
cases being water. Also known as emulsification, the stain detaches from the fabric and is
  3
Removing Coffee Stains From Silk
held by the soluble surfactant molecule, therefore making the former stain Soluble as well.
Cm,
(scienceline.uscb.edu)
Independent Expert Research:
London Cleaners Los Angeles is a dry cleaner with an average 4 star review and 25
years of business in the Los Angeles/Westwood area. As this location of London Cleaners
is located in an area in which many professionals pick up coffee on their way to work, the
coffee on silk stain is not an uncommon sight. Silk garments are very delicate and many
chemicals are too harsh and end up distressing the material. Detergents advertised as
gentle have the capability of breaking up and removing the stain without leaving any marks
behind. Using your hands to apply the detergent and wash the fabric is essential to
0 maintaining the material's appearance as well as air drying to prevent the accidental
setting of the possible left over substance.
Materials:
  Sponge
  Coffee -stained silk
  White Vinegar
  Sink
  Water
  Paper Towels
  4
Removing Coffee Stains From Silk
Procedure:
1. Remove any excess coffee from the silk material by gently patting it with a paper
towel
2. Submerge your sponge in water
3. Squeeze the sponge to remove excess water (it should be damp but not dripping
water)
4. Pour approximately a quarter of a cup of white distilled vinegar into a container or
cup
5. Submerge a corner of the sponge into the white distilled vinegar and remove
excess by pressing it against the inside of the container located above the vinegar
6. Gently and softly dab the sponge with vinegar onto the edges of the stain, moving
inward toward the center of the stain
7. Repeat step 5 and apply the sponge to the silk material once again, this time slowly
wiping the material from the center of the stain and moving outwards
8. Repeat step 5 and continue gently wiping the material using the sponge on all areas
of the stain until it is no longer visible
9. Let material air dry and wash as normal
  5
Removing Coffee Stains From Silk
Observations:
Qualitiative:
Stain 1 Stain 2 Stain 3
Before Vinegar Use dark brown circle dark brown along continuous dark
strong odor the edges, light in brown circle
the middle strong odor
strong odor
During Vinegar Use medium/ light brown medium brown medium brown
circle edges and light circle
strong odor from brown middle strong vinegar smell
vinegar present strong vinegar scent
After Vinegar Use no brown color no brown circle no brown color
present present present
no damage to silk no damage to silk no damage to silk
slight odor no odor no odor
Discussion:
A stain is formed when the proteins and fats within a substance bond to a material
that it is located on. Most stains contain bonds between the substance and the material
that are so strong that they cannot be removed by simply brushing the material with your
hand. Different chemical procedures are required to weaken and break apart the bonds
between the substance and material, and each chemical procedure is specific to the
different types of stains.
Stains come in different variations; Protein stains, Tannin Stains, Oil -based stains,
Dye stains and any combination of them. Because there are several different types of
stains, the strength of the bonds varies and therefore, each individual stain requires a
  6
Removing Coffee Stains From Silk
different treatment in order to successfully and completely remove it without causing
damage to the material. As a result of the differentJaond strengths, some methods of stain
removal can be too strong or not strong enough to weaken the bonds and pull the
substance and material apart (ohionline.osu.edu).
Generally, to remove most stains cold water and some type of laundry detergent or
soap is used. Cold water is used because it is the opposite of hot water, will& locks in
and solidifies the bonds between the substance and material. The bonds are solidified
because the proteins and fats that are a part of the substance are cooked, which has a
direct effect on the material being worked with (ohionline.osu.edu). The process of a liquid
or fluid becoming a hard and thickened mass, or coagulation takes place. When the
substance thickens, it gets caught within the fibers of the material and those harden as well,
making it even more difficult for a chemical to get between the fibers to attack the
substance. By using cold water instead of hot water, the proteins and fats are not cooked
therefore allowing the fibers to remain separated and space leaving the chemicals with
better access to the substance -material bonds.
Laundry detergents are commonly used along with cold water as a method of stain
removal because they contain cleaning enzymes as well as cleaning polymers. Cleaning
enzymes speed up the rate at which the reactions occur, including those that pertain to theN
cleaning polymers. These cleaning polymers are crucial to the effectiveness of the
detergent, without them the stain cannot be removed. Cleaning polymers attack the stain
by digesting the proteins and fats within it. Once the proteins and fats that were once
embedded in the material have been eliminated, the bonds between the substance and
  7
Removing Coffee Stains From Silk
material are severely weakened. As a result of these bonds becoming weaker, it is easier
for them to be broken. The surfactant molecules located within the detergent are also
crucial to removing the stain. After the polymers and enzymes have worked on the stain,
the surfactants rid the material of what is left of the original stain. Surfactant molecules
contain both hydrophilic and hydrophobic parts to them. The hydrophilic part has a
tendency to mix with, dissolve in, or be wetted by water while the hydrophobic side repels
water and cannot be mixed with it. Due to the fact that these surfactant molecules have
both hydrophilic and hydrophobic parts, they are capable of breaking the surface tension of
water. By breaking the surface tension of water, the bond between the substance and
material is furthermore weakened. The stronger the breakage of surface tension, the
weaker the bonds become. By soaking the stain in water you increase the amount of
surface tension available to be broken, thus increasing the strength. If the strength of this
breakage is strong enough, it will severely weaken the bonds between the substance and
material therefore making it easier to break apart.
A surfactant molecule is comprised of a hydrocarbon tail and a small polar head.
The advantages of this tail being a hydrocarbon, a compound made up of both hydrogen
and carbon, are that all organic compounds contain these two elements despite their
varying structures and quantities. All stains contain either proteins, fats or oils; all of which
are organic compounds (scienceprofonline.com). The hydrocarbon tail allows the mblecule
to surround the hydrocarbonic properties of the stain and use it's polar head to dissolve
  txkh-M 7.
into the solvent which is commonly water. organic compounds are most
commonly nonpolar molecules while water is a polar molecule (school-for-champions,com).
(
  8
Removing Coffee Stains From Silk
As a result of the differing polarities, one cannot dissolve into the other (Creating a
Chlorine Pool Packet Lab Report). In order for the nonpolar stain to gain the ability to
dissolve into the polar water molecules, an emulsifier is needed. Typically polar molecules
only dissolve into other polar molecules while nonpolar molecules only dissolve into other
nonpolar molecules. An emulsifier however changes this characteristic of polar and
nonpolar molecules (newton.dep.antgov). A surfactant molecule is an example of an
emulsifier, its hydrophilic part attracts the water to it while the hydrophobic part attracts the
hydrocarbon to itself, allowing the two substances to mix (emulsifiers.org).
Once the substances have been mixed together, the stain is detached from the
material. Although the stain is no longer bonded to the material itself, it is still present on
top of it. In order for the stain to be completely removed dissolving must occur. Dissolving
is when a solute moves and fits into the spaces located between the molecules pertaining
to the solvent. But in order for dissolving to occur, the substance that is trying to fit into the
empty spaces of another chemical substance must be soluble; have the ability to dissolve
into something (Salt and Water Behavior Appendix). The substance must have a strong
molecule to ion attraction in order to overpower the ion to ion attraction that is keeping that
substance to itself and preventing it from moving toward the spaces between the solvent
molecules. The solvent molecules must have an opposing charge to those of the solute
molecules in order for them to make the transition from not being attracted to anything, to
being attracted to the solvent. If the solvent molecules are oppositely charged, the solute
ions will separate and move into the spaces between the molecules that they are attracted
to (Salts and Dissolving Appendix).
  9
Removing Coffee Stains From Silk
In the case of a stain, the surfactant molecules found in detergents are soluble in
water. Therefore, once the stain has been detached from the material and attached to the
surfactant molecule, it too becomes soluble in water. When the surfactant molecule and
stain have dissolved into the water without any substance remaining on the material, the
stain has been successfully removed.
Coffee is known as a Tannin stain, a yellowish or brownish compound originating
from various plants (dictionary.reference.com). Coffee has a dark brown color, exhibiting
the quality of tannin stains that makes them difficult to remove (ohionline.osu.edu). It
contains Caffeine which is a white crystalline xanthine alkaloid, meaning that it is
comprised of compounds consisting of nitrogen due to its alkaloid nature
(wikipedia.orgiwiki/Caffeine). Xanthine is a family of different alkaloid compounds and it
has a similar molecular structure to that of caffeine (answers.yahoo.com). Caffeine can be
written as C8 1 -1 1 . 0N402, it's chemical formula. In terms of molecular structure, Caffeine
contains both single and double bonds between its elements. Double bonds occur
between oxygen and carbon, nitrogen and a carbon branch (also connected to a hydrogen
atom and a nitrogen branch), and two carbon atoms. On the other hand single bonds occur
from H3C to nitrogen and nitrogen to carbon (apchemcyhs.wikispaces.com). However
once this molecular structure is drawn out, it is noticeable that it is not symmetrical. By the
molecular structure being asymmetrical, it is determined that a caffeine molecule has
opposing sides and it is therefore polar. Polar molecules cannot hold onto their electrons
as easily as nonpolar molecules because of the in balance between their sides. As a
result of this, the relative IMF or InfraMolecular Forces of polar molecules such as caffeine
  10
Removing Coffee Stains From Silk
must be very strong in order to force the molecule to stay together (Molecular Qualities
Appendix). At SIP or Standard Temperature and Pressure, coffee is a liquid therefore
implying that the IMF is of moderate strength.
Each bond within the caffeine molecule has a certain amount of energy associated
with it, and therefore they require a certain amount of energy to break them apart (Creating
a Hot Pack with Calcium Chloride Lab Report). The double bonds exhibited in the caffeine
molecule represent a greater amount of force being used in order to keep those elements
bonded, for example the carbon to carbon bond. Although the number of single bonds
within the caffeine molecule outnumbers the quantity of double bonds, more energy is
required to break all of the bonds than if all bonds had been single.
Silk is composed of natural protein fibers that are woven together. The proteins that
make up the silk material are organic hydrocarbons, therefore making silk an organic
substance. The proteins that make up silk are actually the amino acids Glycine (C2H NO2),
Alanine (HOCCH(NH)CH), and Serine (C H NO3)1 thus making C12H29N501/ the chemical
3 7
formula for silk (wiki.answers.com). Based on the large quantities of each element, a
molecule of silk is very large. The large size of this molecule directly affects it's relative
IMF. Despite the fact that silk acts like both a polar and nonpolar molecule due to it's
enzymatic nature and thus has a seemingly.moderate IMF, the vast size of the molecule
makes it very difficult for the electrons to be held onto and the bonds to be maintained.
This makes it very easy for the electrons to be lost, therefore requiring a great amount of
force to hold onto them. Silk exhibits qualities related to both polar and non olar molecules
as a result of being comprised of three different amino acids (books.google.com). Glycine
  11
Removing Coffee Stains From Silk
is ionic however it acts as a polar molecule, Alanine is nonpolar and hydrophobic, while
Serine is polar (thinkpeptides.com). Since two of the three amino acids that make up silk
are polar, the molecule as a whole is considered to be polar with some nonpolar qualities.
As coffee and silk are both considered to be polar, when coffee is spilt onto silk it
produces a stain due to polar molecules being attracted to one another. Just as polar
molecules are attracted to each other, polar substances dissolve best in other polar
substances. In order to effectively separate the two polar substances and remove the
stain, a separate polar substance must be used for the coffee to become attracted to and
dissolve into. Distilled vinegar, otherwise known as CH3COOH is a polar molecule with an
asymmetrical molecular structure (wiki.answers.com). The matching polarity of the caffeine
in coffee and the vinegar prevents the coffee frotabeing-insoluble in this case. The IMF
L
between the caffeine molecules is no longer strong enough to hold them together therefore
they break apart and move toward the vinegar molecules that they are attracted to. The
move to fit in between the spaces of the vinegar molecules during the dissolving process
and are completely removed from the silk.
Environmental Effect:
White distilled vinegar can give off toxic gases such as carbon monoxide and
carbon dioxide, which are used by many natural vegetation in processes like
photosynthesis which continuously create products such as oxygen and energy that
essential to the survival of both animals and humans. (phytotechlab.com)
  12
Removing Coffee Stains From Silk
Economic Impact:
White distilled vinegar is available on average for a low cost of approximately
$1.00-2.00 at almost all grocery stores. It also comes in different size ranges, the most
being 1 gallon for around $6.00. (phytotechlab.com)
Healtti
p_
ac
n
t:
If white distilled vinegar comes in contact with your eyes it can cause irritation. If it is
used in an unventilated room it may cause respiratory problems and contact with your skin
may result in irritation. Safety glasses, gloves, and sleeves are recommended when using
vinegar. In case it comes in contact with your eyes, you should immediately rinse them out
with water and go to a medical professional. If ingested it can cause problems with your
liver and intestines and you should contact a doctor as soon as possible.
(phytotechlab.corn)
Conclusion:
I would recommend the use of white distilled vinegar to remove coffee stains from
silk as it is highly effective and non -damaging. It is an easily affordable and accessible
method with little to no health risks if used properly with the right safety precautiorre i/
  13
Removing Coffee Stains From Silk
C-1
Works Cited
Individual Online Research:
"The Chemistry behind Stain Removers." Prezi.corn. N.p., n.d. Web. 08 May 2014.
  http://prezi.corniugycfadmde5r/the-chemistry-behind-stain-removersk
"Find a Stain Solution." Coffee/Tea Stain Removal: Official Tide Stain Solution. N.p., n.d.
Web. 08 May 2014.
  littp://www.tide.com/en-US/stains/resulticoffee-tea.jspx  
"How to Remove Coffee Stains from Silk." WikiHow. N.p., n.d. Web. 08 May 2014.
  http://www.wilcihow.com/Remove-Coffee-Stains-from-Silk  
"Quick 'n Easy Stain Removal." Quick 'n Easy Stain Removal. N.p., n.d. Web. 08 May
2014
  http://ohioline.osu.edu/outside/stainrem.html#csas  
"Stain Removal Guide." Stain Removal Guide. N.p., n.d. Web. 08 May 2014.
  thttp://www.chemistry.co.nz/stain_frame.htm  
"Surfactants: Detergent Chemistry." Surfactants: Detergent Chemistry. N.p., n.d. Web. 08
  14
Removing Coffee Stains From Silk
May 2014. \
I
  http://www.chemistry.eo.nz/surfactants.htm  
"UCSB Science Line Sqtest." UCSB Science Line Sqtest. N.p., n.d. Web. 08 May 2014.
  http://scienceline.uesb.edu/getkey.php?key=2173  
THE ULTIMATE STAIN REMOVAL GUIDE: House Cleaning & Tackling Life's
Toughest Stains - The Maids Biog." The Maids Blog. N.p., n.d. Web. 08 May 2014.
  http://www.maids.comfblog/the-ultimate-stain-removal-guide-house-cleaning-tackling-
lifes-toughest-stainsi  
"Glycerol." Wikipedia. Wiltimedia Foundation, 05 Dec. 2014. Web. 15 May 2014.
  http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Glycerol  
Independent Expert Research:
London Cleaners Los Angeles
London Dry Cleaners, Inc.
1073 Gayley Avenue
Los Angeles, CA 90024
londoneleanerslosangeles@gmail.com
Discussion:
Retrieved from
  http://en.wilcipedia.org/wiki/Caffeine  
  15
Removing Coffee Stains From Silk
Retrieved from
  http://www.scienceprofonline.comichemistry/what-is-organic-chemistry-carbohydrates
-proteins-lipids-nucleic-acids.html  
Retrieved from
  http://www.newton.dep.antgoviaskasci/chem99/chem99484.htm  
Retrieved from
  http://www.emulsifiers.org/ViewDocument.asp?ItemId— 1 18,ETitle=What+is+an.  
Retrieved from
  http://dictionary.reference.com/browse/txmin  
I
Retrieved from
  http://www.sehoo1-for-champions.comichemistry/polar_molecules.htmff.U5oIKE7oa_
E  
Retrieved from
  https://answers.yahoo.comiquestion/index?gid=20110313112111AAg90gF  
Retrieved from
  http://apchemcyhs.wildspaces.com/Amines  
Retrieved from
  http://wiki.answers.com/Q/What is_thushemical formula_of silk  
  16
Removing Coffee Stains From Silk
Retrieved from
  http://books.google.com/books?id=A81511mEGEdgC&pg=PA110&lpg—PA110&dg
—polarity+of+silk&source=bl&ots=VwWt-iv037&sigr6inbRfSIQzp9V3s25e78ThwMniw&hl
—en&sa—X&ei—oUaaU8srJMaiyATU8Y1CABw&ved=OCCOQ6AEwAgifv=onepage&g—pola
rity%20oP/020silk& false  
Retrieved from
  www.thinkpeptides.com/aminoacidproperties.html  
Retrieved from
  hrtp://wiki.answers.com/Q/What_is the_chemical_polarity_of vinegar  
Retrieved from
  phytotechlab.com  
I )
Retrieved from
Creating a Chlorine Pool Packet Lab Report
Retrieved from
Salt and Water Behavior Appendix
Retrieved from
Salts and Dissolving Appendix
Retrieved from
Molecular Qualities Appendix
Retrieved from
Creating a Hot Pack with Calcium Chloride Lab Report
  17
Removing Coffee Stains From Silk
Giil
Cam ryn     cam ryn. @gmail.com  
Coffee Stain Removal
2 messages
Camryn     camryn. @gmail.com   Mon, May 12, 2014 at
3:32 PM
To: londoncleanerslosangeles@gmail.com
London Cleaners Los Angeles,
Hello, my name is Camryn  
and I am a student at Brewster High School in
Brewster, New York. For my chemistry class I
am researching how to remove a specific stain
from a given material in order to draw a
conclusion as to what the most efficient and
effective method is. The stain I am researching
is coffee on silk and by being such a
well-known and commonly used cleaner in the
busy Los Angeles area you may have tended tc
such a stain before as many professionals
drink coffee in their daily routine. I was hoping
that you had some advice as to how to remove
this stain without damaging such a delicate
fabric. I hope to hear from you soon.
Thank you very much,
Camryn  
  18
Removing Coffee Stains From Silk
London Cleaners Los Angeles Fri, May 16, 2014 at
  Iondoncleanerslosangeles@gmail.com   6:13 PM
To: Camryn     camryn. @gmail.com  
Camryn,
Thank you for contacting London Cleaners Los
Angeles, we would love to help you as best as we
can. As you mentioned, silk garments are rather
delicate. Many traditional cleaning methods are too
strong and can damage the garment. Even though
hand washing the garment with soap is a fairly gentle
technique, it actually makes the coffee stain
permanent. I suggest using a common detergent
you can find in store, and if possible one that is
advertised as being gentle or without harsh
chemicals. Apply the detergent to the stain with
warm water using your hands, as placing the
garment in the washing machine risks damaging the
silk. Once you believe the stain is removed, hang dry
your garment, as placing the garment in the dryer wil
cause the stain to become permanent. Thank you for
contacting us. I hope we were able to help you with
your research.
London Dry Cleaners Inc.
1073 Gayley Avenue
Los Angeles, CA 90024
http://www.londoncleanerslosangeles.com/
  19
Removing Coffee Stains From Silk
Creating a Chlorine Pool Packet
Camryn  
Lab Partners: Carly Corbett, Ava Faitakes, Giana Urizzo
April 28, 2014
  20
Removing Coffee Stains From Silk
Objective: To advise as to whether investment within a company that produces
pre -measured chlorine packets for pools and hot tubs should be made.
individual Online Research:
The original purpose behind placing chemicals in swimming pools is to prevent the
growth of several different bacteria, fungi, and algae through disinfecting and sanitizing the
area. Although chlorine is also used in household chemicals for the same purpose, the
concentration of chlorine in a pool is much higher than that of a common chemical cleaner.
Cleaners are often comprised of only 2-5% with chlorine while swimming pool cleaners can
be made up of anywhere from 12-95% of chlorine. The reasoning behind the drastic
difference is that the overwhelmingly high concentration of water in the pool dilutes any
chemicals added into it, therefore a high concentration of the required chemicals must be
added for them to be effective (epa.gov).
When the chlorine chemical is added into the pool, it actually splits up into various
different chemicals. How much of these chemicals is distributed into the pool is dependant
on the ph level of the pool. When the ph is too high, a chemical known as hypochlorous
acid (HOCI) is not very present in the pool water, resulting in the cleaning process to take
much longer than if the ph was about 7 or 8 which is considered neutral
(science.howstuffworks.com). The more HOCI present, the faster the bacteria will be
eliminated and the pool will be decontaminated. The ph of the pool should be maintained
at a number similar to that of the swimmer, approximately 7.2 or 7.8 in order to prevent
irritation yet still be effective (cdc.gov).
  21
Removing Coffee Stains From Silk
Chlorine can be very harmful when found in high concentrations. Skin irritation is a
common side effect as well as effects on the respiratory system due to the inhalation of the
chlorine gas on the surface of the water (science.howstuffworks.com). Producers have
opened up a market to chemicals that are able to substitute chlorine as a cleaning device
yet still be highly effective. Salt water pools are increasing in popularity. By using a
generator to pass electric current through the water, the chloride ions that were a part of the
salt become chlorine that kills bacteria and microorganisms (earth911.com).
The optimal pH for a swimming pool should be approximately 7.4 which is around
the same pH of the human eye however the range can extend from 6-8. The lower the pH,
the greater the concentration of free Hydrogen ions in the water. The increase in the pH
level will decrease the effectiveness of the chlorine in the pool (solar-breeze.com).
0
Independent Expert Research:
Frank Brown has owned and maintained his own pool for over 12 years. The
chlorine based products that he adds to his pool to act as a cleaning agent and regulate
the pH typically come in either a powder form that must be mixed with water before use.
There are other methods of cleaning that he uses in addition to chlorine such as a filter and
the use of a net to remove leaves and bugs from the surface. His daily test of pH ensures
that the goal of a neutral solution is achieved and maintained, if these levels drop or rise he
knows that he must add more chlorine or dilute it's concentration. The desired neutral pH
of 7 ensures that the pool is a safe environment for swimmers and the risk of negative side
effects on people such as burning of eyes and skin are avoided.
  22
Removing Coffee Stains From Silk
Discussion:
A pool is a large amount of water enclosed in a given area. Swimming pools come
in many different sizes, and the size of the area dictates the amount of water that needs to
go into it. In order for these pools to be safe chemicals are added into the water and by
doing so, the pool resembles a solution. A solution is a homogenous mixture in which a
solute is dissolved into a solvent therefore, the chemicals being placed into the water act
as a solute that dissolves in the water, making it a solvent and turning the pool into a
solution. In the case of swimming pools, the chemical solutes added into the water are
often salts.
Before any dissolving occurs, the solute is placed into the solvent, in this case being
water and displacement of that solvent occurs. The solvent molecules are moved from their
original position since the solute molecules are unable to move, they can only vibrate in
place. Once the solvent molecules have moved around and over the solute and completely
surround it, dissolving takes place. The solute must have a greater molecule to ion
attraction in order for dissolving to occur, if it has a stronger ion to ion attraction than the
ions within that compound will remain attracted to each other and not the solvent, thus
preventing it from splitting apart. The greater molecule to ion attraction allows for the ions
of the solute to split up, move toward the solvent molecules and fit into the spaces between
them. Once the solute ions have been placed into the spaces in between the solvent
molecules, dissolving has occurred (Salt Appendix 7).
The amount of our solvent of water directly affects how much of the solute can be
  23
Removing Coffee Stains From Silk
dissolved. The more water available, the greater the number of spaces between the
molecules available for the solute ions to dissolve into. There are multiple variables that
can easily affect the amount of water in the pool and therefore change the amount of
chemicals that can be dissolved. Evaporation and a large quantity of swimmers can result
in a great loss of water, eliminating numerous spaces in which a the solute could have
dissolved. Rain on the other hand can result in a great increase in the amount of water in
the pool and create more spaces for dissolving to occur in. The temperature of the water
and surrounding area also has an effect on the ability to dissolve as temperature dictates
the size of the spaces. The greater the temperature, the bigger the space and easier
dissolving is, while cold temperatures reduce the size of the spaces.
The chemicals placed into swimming pools are often referred to as chlorine, when in
fact pure chlorine is not actually used. Pure chlorine is in the gaseous phase and can have
harmful effects on a person's health when it is inhaled. Because it is in the gaseous phase
it is also not able to dissolve into solution. Chloride salts however are commonly used in
swimming pools as a way of elimination the formation and growth of bacteria. Salts are
neutral ionic compounds with high IMF and high melting points. The greater ion to ion
attraction in salts allows for them to easily dissolve and create solutions. Chloride salts
have the ability to dissolve into the solvent and effectively limit the growth and production of
bacteria.
When determining whether a chemical such as a chloride salt is an acid or a base
you must know its pH, or the number of 1-1+ ions that it puts into solution. The pin pH
represents the negative log of, therefore a solute that places 106 W ions into solution will
  24
Removing Coffee Stains From Silk
have a pH level of 6. According to this rule the greater the amount of HI+ ions added, the
more acidic the chemical is considered. Chemicals that put fewer H. ions and more 0H
ions into solution are known as bases. All pH numbers can be placed us against a pH
scale that with ratings of 0-14 in which levels 1-6 are acidic, 7 is neutral, and 8-14 are
basic. Regular testing of the pools ph will determine whether more chloride salt needs to
be added or whether it should be diluted by adding more water in order to reach and
maintain the desired pH of approximately 7. In order for a solution that is either acidic or
basic to become the other, it must pass through neutral first. By adding OH-ions to an
acidic solution, the pH will gradually rise and the solution will become less acidic until it
reaches 7 and becomes neutral. If OH-ions are continuously added after reaching this
point, the solution will gradually become more basic. In the case of pools, adding more of
the solvent into the solution is another way to effectively decrease the pH and concentration
of the chloride salt. Adding H+ ions to a basic solution will have the opposite effect, the pH
will decrease and the solution will become more basic. If they are still added after reaching
the neutral level of 7, then the solution becomes acidic (Molecular Qualifies Appendix).
Rodgarski 25
Removing Coffee Stains From Silk
Conclusion 
(Th
Although the creation and distribution of a pre -measured chlorine packet for pools
and hot tubs is possible, I would not recommend investing in the product. According to the
scientific explanation above, there are too many uncertainties to assure that this product
will work effectively every time it is used by a consumer.
  26
Removing Coffee Stains From Silk
Works Cited
Retrieved from
http://www.epa.gov/Icidshometour/products/cjug.htm
Retrieved from
http://science.howstuffworks.com/innovation/science-questions/question652.htm
Retrieved from
http://www.cdc.gov/healthywater/swimming/pools/disinfection-team-chlorine-ph.html
Retrieved from
http://earth911.com/news/2012/08/14/ehlorine-pool-alternatives-natural-swimming-pools-ozon
e -pools/
Retrieved from
http://www.solar-bree2e.com/blog/2013/04/08/what-ph-should-my-pool- water -be/
)
Frank Brown (Expert Research Interview)
Salt Appendix 07 (Discussion)
Molecular Qualities Appendix (Discussion)
  27
Removing coffee Stains From silk
Interview with Frank Brown, pool owner:
How long have you owned a pool for?
"I have owned and taken care of my pool for about the past 12 years."
What chemicals do you put into your pool and what form do they come in?
"I put chlorine into the pool. I often buy it from Walmart as they tend to carry it for a low and
affordable price. For the most part the chlorine I buy comes in powder form and must be
mixed with water before being placed into the pool itself."
What is the job of the chlorine in the pool, what is it supposed to accomplish?
"The job of the chlorine is to clean the pool and remove any bacteria that may be I. The
water. It provides a safe environment for the swimmer where they don't have to be afraid of
getting sick. It also helps to regulate the pH of the water."
What other steps are taken to clean and disinfect the pool? Are they effective?
"The pool filter is cleaned out once a day to ensure that it is always working at it's highest
potential. Throughout the day it also clean the surface of the pool with the net to remove
leaves and bugs that have ended up in the water. This methods are effective in keeping
the pool clean and safe."
What pH do you maintain in your pool and for what reasons?
"The pool water should have a pH of about 7. This is because that is the safest pH for
people to swim in without having bad side effects."
What are the effects of too much or not enough chemicals being placed in the
pool?
  28
Removing Coffee Stains From Silk
"Depending on whether too much or not enough is added will either cause a drop in pH
levels or a significant increase in them. This creates an unsafe environment for people to
swim in."
How often do you add the chemicals too the pool water?
"The size of the pool typically determines how often the chemicals need to be added. I
tend to place the chemicals in the water about once or twice a week. When its very hot out
the chemicals need to be added more frequently."
How often do you need to test the pH?
The pH needs to be tested once a day to ensure that the pool is a safe environment.
Depending on the weather though, it may need to be checked more frequently."
(T)
  29
Removing Coffee Stains From Silk
Camryn  
Regents Chemistry
Mrs. Welch
7 February 2014
Salt and Water Behavior
Lab Partners: Carly Corbett, Ave Faitakes, Giana Urizzo
Purpose:
To determine the relationship between salt and water.
(Corbett)
Questions:
(Part 1)
Will the salts physical properties change?
What bond is each salt?
Will the IMF break due to entropy?
What type of reaction will occur?
Is there a pattern of physical properties for salts?
Why did the color of the copper II sulfate change?
VVhy did the color come back after adding water?
VVhy did the color of the rock salt not change?
Did anything evaporate from the rock salt?
What is a hydrate?
How is a hydrate different than a solution?
VVhy is copper II sulfate a hydrate and not sodium chloride?
(Corbett)
(Part 2)
Will all the salts dissolve in water?
Why do some take longer to dissolve than others?
  30
Removing Coffee Stains From Silk
Does the size of the salt affect the rate at which the salt dissolves?
If the compound does not dissolve in water is it salt?
What are the properties of an ionic bond?
What is the relationship between IMF and entropy?
Can the compounds dissolved be washed down the drain?
Why can some go down the drain and not others?
(Corbett)
Materials:
(Part 1)
  Two evaporating dishes
  copper (II) sulfate
  sodium chloride
  Micro -pipette
  Water - enough to fill the pipette
  Scale
(Corbett)
(Part 2)
  Scoopula
  Pipette
  Water- to fill the pipette
  Beakers - enough for each chemical in use
  barium chloride
  magnesium carbonate
  ammonium chloride
  sodium bicarbonate
  strontium carbonate
  sodium chloride
  copper (II) acetate
  sodium carbonate
  calcium carbonate
  copper (II) sulfate
  magnesium sulfate
  31
Removing Coffee Stains I-rom Silk
  sucrose
  potassium hydroxide
(Corbett)
Procedure:
(Part 1)
1. Mass two evaporating dishes and record
2. Measure approximately 2-3 grams of copper (II) sulfate and sodium chloride and place each
chemical into the two separate evaporating dishes
3. Mass each dish with their corresponding chemical placed inside and record
4. Turn on hot plate to slightly lower than its maximum heat setting
5. Put on safety goggles before continuing with the next step
6. Place the two evaporating dishes on the hot plate for about 5-10 minutes
7. After the dishes have been heated, remove them from the hot plate and let them cool until they
are safe to pick up
8. Mass both dishes, record, and calculate the mass that was lost
(Part 2)
Repeat the following steps for each chemical being used:
1. Observe the chemical prior to any manipulation and record all observations pertaining to it's
physical state including phase, color, odor, and texture
2. Find the health number located on the packaging where the chemical came from and record
3. Using a scoopula. get a small amount of the chemical and place it into a beaker labeled with
the name of the chemical
4. Using a micropipette, fill it with water and place one drop into the beaker containing the
chemical
  32
Removing Coffee Stains From Silk
5. Swirl the mixture around in the beaker
6. Repeat steps 4 and 5 until the chemical has either dissolved or no change is noticeable
Observations:
Qualitative:
(Part 1)
Before Experiment:
  comer (In sulfate
o Bright Blue
o Small Crystals
o Some scattered white crystals
  sodium chloride
o White
o Larger crystals than Copper (II) Sulfate
0
During Heating:
  copper (II) sulfate
o Blue crystals popping up, "jumping"
o Color change from bright blue to light blue
o Crystals decreasing in size, almost a powder
o crystals on edges slowly turning white
  sodium chloride
o No change
After Water is Added:
  copper (In sulfate
o Color change from light blue back to bright blue
  sodium chloride
o No change (Faitakes)
I I
  33
Removing Coffee Stains From Silk
Quantitative:
(Part 1)
Tables:
Evaporating Dish Masses
Evaporating Dish A Evaporating Dish B
41.76g 41.6g
** Evaporating Dish A will hold sodium chloride and Evaporating Dish B will hold copper (II)
sulfate
Masses of Evaporating Dishes Containing Compounds Before Heating
Evaporating Dish A Evaporating Dish B
449 43.6g
Compound Masses Before Heating
sodium chloride copper (II) sulfate
2.24g 2g
Masses of Evaporating Dishes Containing Compounds After Heating
Evaporating Dish A Evaporating Dish B
43.959 42.9g
  34
Removing Coffee Stains From Silk
Compound Masses After Heating
sodium chloride copper (II) sulfate
2.19g 1.3g
Calculations:
Amount of sodium chloride lost as a result of heating = initial mass - final mass
Amount of sodium chloride lost as a result of heating = (2.24g) - (2.19g)
Amount of sodium chloride lost as a result of heating = .05g
Amount of copper (II) sulfate lost as a result of heating = initial mass - final mass
Amount of copper (II) sulfate lost as a result of heating = (2g) - (1.3g)
Amount of copper (II) sulfate lost as a result of heating = .7g
Percent Composition by Mass of water in CuSO 4   5H2 0 :
% composition by mass = (mass of part / mass of whole) x 100
% composition by mass = (.7g) / (2g) x 100
% composition by mass = .35 x 100
Percent Composition by Mass of water = 35%
  35
Removing Coffee Stains From Silk
Qualitative:
(Part 2)
Name Colo Phase Textur Formul Healt Reactivit Odo Flammability # of
r e a h y r drops of
water
sodium Whit solid Powde NaHCO 0 1 No 0 5
bicarbonat e r
3
e
(Holler/Sal
amone)
strontium Whit Solid Powde SrCO3 1 0 No 0 1 'A
carbonate( e r
Holler/Sala
mone)
sodium Clea Solid Rocks NaCI 1 0 No 0 11/2
chloride(H r
oller/Salam cryst
one) al
copper (II) Blue Solid Rocks 1 0 No 0 5
acetate(Le C4H6C
htonen,Go u04
nska,Buona
donna)
sodium Whit Solid powde Na2C0 1 1 No 0 7
carbonate e r 3
(Jacobsen) (fine)
calcium whit solid powde CaCO3 0 0 N/A 0 4
carbonate e r
(Dougherty
)
barium whit solid crystal BaCl2   N/A N/A No N/A 6
chloride e s
21-120
(Faitakes)
  36
Removing Coffee Stains From Silk
magnesium whit solid powde 4MgC0 1 0 yes - 0 Cannot
carbonate e r 501.0" be 3  
(Faitakes) dissolve Mg(OH
d ),  
x1-1 20
ammonium whit solid Very NI -1 4C1 1 0 No 0 12
chloride e fine
(Faitakes) crystal
s
copper (II) blue solid powde CuSO4 2 1 N/A 0 6
sulfate r/ very
(Parke) small
crystal
S
magnesium whit solid powde MgSO4 1 0 No 0 2
sulfate e r
(Lehtonen,
Gonska,Bu
onadonna)
sucrose whit solid crystal C12H22 1 0 No 1 3
(Lehtonen, e 011
Gonska,Bu
onadonna)
potassium whit solid pellets (OH 3 0 No 2 4
hydroxide e
(Lehtonen
, Gonska,
Buonadon
na)
Quantitative:
(Part 2)
Percent Error:
  37
'Removing Coffee Stains From Silk
Percent Error = [(accepted value - measured value) / accepted value] x 100
Percent Error = [(.36 - .35) / .36] x 100
Percent Error = [(.01) / .36] x 100
Percent Error = 2.78%
Percent Error Analysis:
After calculating the percent error to be 2.78%, I am able to conclude that the low
percentage determined was a result of very minimal errors. These errors could have taken
place during the massing of the different dishes and chemicals. If the scale had not been
properly cleared and started at zero before having the items placed on it, an inaccurate mass
could have been recorded and used through the experiment.
Interpretation:
Salts have ionic bonds, always occurring between a metal and a non-metal. Ionic bonds
are always 100% polar, therefore all salts are 100% polar and contain cations and anions.
Cations are ions containing a positive charge while anions are ions containing a negative charge.
As a result of the opposite charges associated with the two different ions, there is a natural force
of attraction that acts on the cation and anion by pulling them together. As the ions are of
complete opposite charges and are being pulled together, the IMF or intramolecular forces
between them are very strong. When the IMF between ions is weak, it allows for the ions to
move around as demonstrated by a substance in liquid phase. The ions can even fully break
apart, resulting in a substance that is in the gaseous phase. In the case of salts however, the
strong IMF that keeps the ions close together and prevents them from moving keeps the
substance in said phase. When the IMF between ions is strong, it also requires an extensive
amount of heat in order to weaken, stretch, and even break it. Therefore, all salts share the
common characteristic of high melting points. In order for the salts to reach their high melting
points, heat needs to be added to them. Heat and temperature have a direct relationship and as
one increases, so does the other. As more and more heat is applied to the salts and their
temperature raises, the entropy or natural forces pulling the ions apart, increases in strength.
The IMF is eventually no longer strong enough to keep the ions together and overpower the
entropy, therefore the entropy is more dominant and dissociation or the process of pulling apart
  38
Removing Coffee Stains From Silk
ionic compounds, takes place.
All salts dissolve in water, however they may dissolve at different rates and different
amounts as a result of their size and solubility. The bigger the salt, the more time it will take for
all of the salt to dissolve because there is a large quantity of it. Solubility is the ability of a
substance to dissolve. Those substances that have a molecule to ion attraction that is greater
than their ion to ion attraction are more soluble than those that have the reverse, a greater ion to
ion attraction. The ions that make up salts are attracted to each other due to their opposite
charges therefore they stay together and form a solid salt. When this salt is placed in water
however, the ions in the salt are now attracted to the oppositely charged molecules of water. In
salts that have a strong molecule to ton attraction, the ions in the salt split up due to the greater
force of attraction pulling them towards the molecules. These ions then settle into the spaces
between the solvent molecules, therefore dissolving into the water and the once highly visible
salt appears to be gone. In the case of substances that have a stronger on to ion attraction,
when they are placed in a solvent they still experience the attraction to the solvent molecules
because of their opposing charges. Despite this attraction occurring, the ions remain together
as their attraction to the solvent molecules is not stronger than their attraction to each other and
is therefore not enough to pull them apart and into the spaces between the molecules. As a
result of the ions staying together, the substance is unable to dissolve into the solvent and is
therefore insoluble in that particular substance.
  39
Removing Coffee Stains From Silk
Works Cited
Corbett, Carly- Purpose, Questions (Parts 1 and 2), Materials (Parts 1 and 2)
Faitakes, Ava- Qualitative Observations (Part 1), Qualitative Observations on barium chloride,
magnesium carbonate, and ammonium chloride (Part 2)
Holler and Salamone- Qualitative Observations on sodium bicarbonate, strontium carbonate,
and sodium chloride (Part 2)
Lehtonen, (3onska, and Buonadonna- Qualitative Observations on copper(II) acetate,
magnesium sulfate, sucrose, and potassium hydroxide (Part 2)
Jacobsen- Qualitative Observations on sodium carbonate (Part 2)
Dougherty- Qualitative Observations on calcium carbonate (Part 2)
Parise- Qualitative Observations on copper(II) sulfate (Part 2)
  40
Removing Coffee Stains From Silk
Camryn  
Regents Chemistry
Mrs. Welch
24 March 2014
Salts and Dissolving
Definition of salt: A salt is any ionic compound.
Difference between aqueous and hydrate: Hydrates and aqueous are two types of solutions that
are related to water in different ways. An aqueous solution is a solution in which water acts as
the solvent the molecules dissolve into. A hydrate is a compound in which for each amount of
molecules of a given compound, there are a certain number of water molecules that are
attached to them, one example being copper (II) sulfate pentahydrate or CuSO 4   5H20.
0 % composition by mass: When heat is applied to the salt, the water that was once a part of it is
driven off and becomes a gas. The salt is now anhydrous as the water molecules have been
completely separated from the compound and moved into the surrounding air. By using the
formula for percent composition by mass and the mass of the compound before and after heat
was applied, you are able to determine the percent of water in the original compound.
Compare properties of salts: As a result of the opposite charges associated with the two
different ions, there is a natural force of attraction that acts on the cation and anion by pulling
them together. As the ions are of complete opposite charges and are being pulled together, the
IMF or intramolecular forces between them are very strong. In the case of salts, the strong IMF
keeps the ions close together and prevents them from moving, resulting in the substance being
in solid phase. When the IMF between ions is strong, it also requires an extensive amount of
heat in order to weaken, stretch, and even break it. Therefore, all salts share the common
  41
Removing Coffee Stains From Silk
characteristic of high melting points. As a result of this high IMF, all salts are hard solids at
SIP.
Different dissolving rates - solution terms and what happens when the solutes were placed in
water: When a solute like a salt is placed in water, water displacement occurs. This is because
the sok salt is incapable of moving, it can only vibrate back and forth while a liquid is able to
move. Once the solvent has been placed in the solute of water, the water molecules move
around and over the salt until it is completely covered. The volume of water has not changed
however it has adapted to the conditions by changing its shape.
Dissolving - what is the difference between what happens to salts that do or do not dissolve in
water? how does this relate to Table F?: Those substances that have a molecule to ion
attraction that is greater than their ion to ion attraction are more soluble than those that have the
0
reverse, a greater ion to ion attraction. Table F clearly separates these ions that contribute
to the formation of compounds that are either soluble or insoluble, based on whether
they have a stronger molecule to ion attraction or ion to ion attraction. When a salt is
placed in a solvent such as water for example, the ions in the salt are now attracted to the
oppositely charged molecules of water and the salt ions separate and move toward the water
molecules, eventually fitting into the spaces between them and therefore dissolving into the
solvent.
VVhy were there different amounts of solutes dissolved if the dissolving orocess is the same?:
Different solutes have differing attraction strengths, either the molecule to ion
attraction or ion to ion attraction is stronger. In the case of solutes with a greater ion to
ion attraction, they do not dissolve because the ions want to stay together as opposed
, - to breaking apart and moving toward the solvent molecules. The size and quantity of the
  42
Removing Coffee Stains From Silk
spaces dictates just how much of the salt can be completely dissolved. When the quantity of
salt dissolved is less than the quantity of the solvent the solution is unsaturated, an equal amount
of each results in a saturated solution, and a larger quantity of salt than solvent produces a
super -saturated solution.
Why do heat and more water affect how much dissolves? The greater the amount of water
molecules in a given area, the more spaces there will be for solvents to dissolve into.
When heat is added to the system it results in an increase in the kinetic energy of the
water molecules, weakening the IMF between them and increasing entropy. When the
IMF stretches, the size of the spaces between the molecules increases as well.
VVhv do solids appear when heat and/ or water are removed from the system? What is a
precipitate? How does this relate to Table G?: When heat or water is removed from the
system, the solid salt molecules begin to reappear. As the temperature of the overall
system decreases, the molecules begin to slow down and not move as much, eliminating
size of the spaces between the water molecules. As the quantity of water decreases,
the number of the spaces that the ions could previously go into becomes limited
because there are less water molecules for those spaces to exist between. When these
spaces are removed and limited, the ions that were previously in them are pushed back
out and they form the solid salt because of their ion to ion attraction. Ions in a solution
that come out as a solid are known as precipitates. Table G demonstrates the
relationship between temperature and solubility, providing an easy way to determine and
compare how temperature directly affects how much of a given solute will dissolve.
  43
Removing Coffee Stains From Silk
Camryn  
Regents Chemistry
Mrs. Welch
3 April 2014
Molecular Qualities
Interpretation:
An electron dot diagram or EDD is a drawn representation of the bonding between atoms
within a molecule as well as the number of electrons shifted and whether they are transferred or
shared. After determining the type of bond between two atoms based on their charges and
finding it to be either ionic or covalent, you are able to determine the polarity of the molecule as a
whole. When looking to see a molecules polarity using an electron dot diagram, you must check
to see if the opposing sides are equal. In the case of CH 4 , there is a hydrogen atom located
above, below, to the left of, and to the right of the carbon atom. There are four covalent bonds
taking place within the molecule due to the carbon and hydrogen sharing their valence electrons.
Since the same type of bond is occurring on the opposing sides (right and left, top and bottom)
this molecule is symmetrical and considered to be nonpolar because not one side has more
strength than another. In the case of CIF, although there is one covalent bond between the
chlorine and fluorine atoms, the molecular polarity is polar because the EDD is asymmetrical,
fluorine has more control of the electron making it partially negative while the chlorine atom
becomes partially positive.
The number of protons and electrons of a given molecule relates to its IMF, the smaller
molecules often have a relatively weak IMF because they require a small amount of force to keep
them together in comparison to large molecules which need a lot to keep them close. The
molecular polarity is also a key contributor to the relative IMF, molecules that are polar are going
to require a stronger force to force molecule to stay together while those that are nonpolar are
more likely to stay together naturally. IMF is directly linked to phase therefore a low IMF often
means that the substance is a gas, moderate yields a liquid, and high leads us to conclude that it
is a solid.
Bonds between molecules have a certain amount of energy associated with them, and
thus they require a certain amount to break them. Hexane is a compound that contains two
  44
Removing Coffee Stains From Silk
groups of 5 carbon to carbon bonds and two groups of 14 carbon to hydrogen bonds as well as
19 oxygen to oxygen bonds. Each bond between elements has a specific amount of energy
required to break them and it differs from bond to bond. A carbon to carbon bond only requires
348 joules of energy to break while a carbon to hydrogen bonds needs 413 joules. Substitute the
type of bond with the energy required to break it and then multiply that by how many there are in
order to determine the total energy required to break all bonds of that specific type in the system.
Once you've combined all of the required energy levels discovered using addition, the total
amount of energy needed in order to break all bonds in the system has been determined.
  45
Removing Coffee Stains From Silk
Creating a Hot Pack with Calcium Chloride
Camryn  
Lab Partners: Carly Corbett, Ava Faitakes, Giana Urizio, Carolyn Brandt
November 15, 2013
Poclgorski 46
Removing Coffee Stains From Silk
Objective: To create an effective hot pack that is healthy, environmentally, and
economically safe by combining calcium chloride and water.
Individual Online Research:
Matter typically refers to the atoms that make up the material objects in the world
and these atoms are comprised of electrons, neutrons, and protons. However energy is
not a material object, it is a characteristic of objects and systems. Energy is a
representation of the capability of a system or material to do work and energy is available
in several different forms, all of which may be converted to one of the most common forms,
heat energy. According to the Law of Conservation of Energy, energy cannot be created or
destroyed, it may only change between forms. During the change between forms, heat
energy may be expelled and the amount of heat energy expelled is dependant on the
temperature of the system.
Calcium Chloride is an example of a mineral salt. Calcium Chloride is commonly
used for medical reasons to boost low calcium levels as well as lower high potassium
levels. The formula for Calcium Chloride is CaCl2. This compound is stable at room
temperature and can be found as small beads/pebbles or powder at it's solid phase. The
compound can be combined with water to produce an exothermic chemical reaction, which
is why it is commonly placed on ice and snow.
Materials:
  100mL beaker
  20g of tap water
  109 of calcium chloride
  47
Removing Coffee Stains From silk
  Thermometer
1Th, )
  Safety goggles
  Latex gloves
  Scale
  Scoopula
(Corbett)
Procedure:
1. While performing this lab be sure to to wear gloves and goggles because the
chemical calcium chloride mixed with water will cause irritation if it comes in contact
with your skin or eyes.
2. Put given amounts of calcium chloride and water into separate beakers (20 grams
0 of water and 10 grams of calcium chloride)
3. Take initial temperature readings of the water and record data
4. Add the calcium chloride to the water in a ziplock bag
5. "Break" the bag (mix the calcium chloride and water so an exothermic reaction can
occur)
6. Measure the temperature until it reaches its maximum temperature (the temperature
no longer increases)
7. Record the maximum temperature reached.
8. Determine if the temperature is sufficient enough to produce an effective hot pack
9. Repeat experiment for more trials to see if there are any patterns occurring
(Urizzo)
  48
Removing Coffee Stains From Silk
Observations:
  Water:
o Calm
o Steady
o Clear
o Cool to touch
  Calcium Chloride
o White
o Ball Shaped
o Very small beads, a bit smaller than a pea
o Begin to melt when held in warm (gloved) hand
0 o No obvious scent
  Water and Calcium Chloride Mixture
o Calcium chloride beads begin to decrease in size
o Water becomes a cloudy white color
o After about 2 minutes of stirring, the calcium chloride is no longer solid
o Left with cloudy white water
o Warm to touch
(Faitakes)
  49
Removing Coffee Stains From Silk
Tables:
rTh
Masses of Chemical Substances
Mass of Water Mass of Calcium Chloride
20g 109
Hot Pack Temperature Readings
Trial # Initial Temperature of Water before Final Temperature after
Calcium Chloride was added Calcium Chloride was
added
1 20°C 36°C
2 20°C 38°C
0 3 20°C 36°C
Calculations:
T
- T1 = AT
Trial 1: (36°C) - (20°C) = AT
AT = 16°C
Trial 2: (38°C) - (20°C) = AT
AT = 18°C
Trial 3: (36°C) - (20°C) = AT
AT= 16°C
  50
Removing Coffee Stains From Silk
Operational and Conceptual Understanding:
A chemical reaction takes place between the elements calcium and chlorine
which forms the compound Calcium Chloride so that the individual atoms may become
stable. In order for an atoms to become stable they must have one pair of electrons on the
first shell and four pairs on the outermost shell. Before compound formation takes place,
calcium is not stable because it has two more protons than electrons and chlorine is not
stable because it has one more electron than proton. By forming a compound, a covalent
bond is formed, allowing the atoms to shift electrons away or towards themselves,
eventually getting them the desired four pair of electrons on their outershell.
Energy is released in the form of heat when water and calcium chloride are
combined. The molecules of water are constantly in motion the IMF between these
molecules is strong enough to hold the molecules together while giving them space to
move around. The addition of calcium chloride to water provides the energy that enables
the water molecules to move faster and faster until they break IMF. The breaking of IMF
releases the previously used energy as heat.
Discussion:
The relationship between matter and energy is the basis for creating an effective
exothermic reaction. In this case, calcium chloride and water are two forms of matter each
with individual amounts of energy pertaining to them. The energy associated with these
different materials is a representation of the speed at which the molecules of the different
compounds are moving. When the two chemicals come into contact, the combined energy
of the system is enough to break the IMF bonds existing between the individual molecules.
  51
Removing Coffee Stains From Silk
The energy that at one point represented the speed of the molecule's movement cannot be
created or destroyed according to the first law of thermodynamics, therefore it must change
form. The conversion to heat energy takes place and this different energy form is then
released into the surrounding atmosphere, depicting an exothermic reaction.
Environmental Effect of Calcium Chloride:
Calcium chloride is not able to be absorbed into soil due to its high solubility. When
released into the environment, calcium chloride drains into surface water.
(Corbett)
Health impacts:
Calcium chloride is non -irritating to the skin and respiratory system. It may provoke
severe eye irritation. Calcium chloride show no mutagenic effects.
(Corbett)
Economic impacts:
Calcium chloride is in high demand especially during the winter. The price for
calcium chloride is expected to increase due to the increasing high demand.
(Corbett)
Conclusion:
Calcium chloride and water when mixed together, creating an aqueous solution,
produces heat. This aqueous solution can be dangerous to humans if ingested. However
the economical impact is mainly positive. Although an exothermic reaction occurred, there
was not enough heat released to make an effective hot pack. Another solution should be
used to create an effective hot pack.
(Corbett)
  52
Removing Coffee Stains From Silk
Works Cited
Ava Faitakes- Observations
Giana Urizzo- Procedure
Carly Corbett- Materials, Impacts, Conclusion
lndependant Research:
http://profmattstrasslercom/articles-and-oosts/Darticle-physics-basics/mass-enerdy-matter
-etc/matter-and-enerav-a-false-dichotomy/
http://abyss.uoregoniedu/—is/astl22/lectures/le_c03 html
htto://www.drugs.com/oro/calcium-chloride.html
htto://vimm chemspider.com/Chemical-Structure.23237.html
  53